User Defined Types documentation (#532)
hazelcast/hz-docs: docs/modules/sql/pages/user-defined-types.adoc

[source,sql]
----
SELECT
    (root).b.c.a.b.c.a.b.c.a.b AS v1,
FROM test
WHERE __key = 1
----

Result:
[cols="1"]
|===
|v1 VARCHAR

|'B1'

|===

Accessing additional cyclic chain:

[source,sql]
----
SELECT
    (root).b.c.a.name AS v1,
    (root).b.c.a.b.name AS v2,
    (root).b.c.a.b.c.name AS v3,
    (root).b.c.a.b.c.a.name AS v4
FROM test
WHERE __key = 2
----

Result:
[cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|v1 VARCHAR|v2 VARCHAR|v3 VARCHAR|v4 VARCHAR

|'A3'
|'B3'
|'C3'
|'A2'
|===

== INSERT and UPDATE support

INSERT and UPDATE queries are supported in a limited way, specifically:

- INSERT and UPDATE queries are only supported for non-cyclic type hierarchies, presence of a cycle in a Type Hierarchy
automatically disables ability to run INSERT and UPDATE queries against any MAPPING that uses TYPEs from that TYPE hierarchy.
However, it's still possible to use Acyclic branch of a Type Hierarchy even if that branch is used in a Cyclic Type Hierarchy.
- INSERT queries require specifying full list of columns even if column of a nested type is needs to be set to `NULL`.
- UPDATE queries only work on the root column and also require full list of columns and sub-columns to work,

> updating sub-columns is technically possible by specifying column projections in place of sub-columns that shouldn't be changed.

Reviewer: `UPDATE` queries only work on the root column and also require the full list of columns and sub-columns to work.
Updating sub-columns is technically possible by specifying column projections in place of sub-columns that shouldn't be changed.

> - Both UPDATE and INSERT work through usage of Row Value expression (which is similar to VALUES clause of INSERT)

Reviewer: Both `UPDATE` and `INSERT` work through the usage of Row Value expression (which is similar to `VALUES` clause of `INSERT`).

=== Examples

Following examples use <<normalTypeDefinitions, normal type definitions>> and <<normalMappings, normal mappings>>.

NOTE: Order of column values is identical to the order of columns specified when executing the underlying

> CREATE MAPPING and CREATE TYPE statements.

Reviewer: .... `CREATE MAPPING` and `CREATE TYPE` statements.

Basic Insert of UDT-column:

[source,sql]
----
INSERT INTO users VALUES (1, 'testUser', (1, 'organization1', (1, 'office1')))
----

Skipping initialization of certain columns:

> `(organization).name` and `(organization).office.id` are `null` in this example

Reviewer: ... in this example.

- Limited support for instance and type-level cycles; only for Java types.
Note that INSERT/UPDATE are disabled for mappings that use type hierarchies that contain cycles.
- Limited support for `INSERT` and `UPDATE` queries for mappings using UDTs; if a `TYPE` hierarchy contains cycles,
`INSERT` s and `UPDATE` s become disabled for the mapping that uses this `TYPE` hierarchy.
- Support for using UDT-based projections in both normal `SELECT` projection lists, `WHERE` filters and in `JOIN` conditions.

== Enabling UDT Support
You can enable the UDT usage by setting the `hazelcast.sql.experimental.custom.types.enabled` property to `true` in the configuration.
[tabs]
==== 
XML:: 
+ 
-- 
[source,xml]
----
<hazelcast>
    <properties>
        <property name="hazelcast.sql.experimental.custom.types.enabled">true</property>
    </properties>
</hazelcast>
----
--

YAML::
+
[source,yaml]
----
hazelcast:
  properties:
    hazelcast.sql.experimental.custom.types.enabled: true
----

Java::
+
[source,java]
----
final Config config = new Config();
config.setProperty("hazelcast.sql.experimental.custom.types.enabled", "true");
----
====

== Creating Types

> Types can be created with the `CREATE TYPE` command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a new type, use the `CREATE TYPE` statement:
```

[source,sql]
----
CREATE [OR REPLACE] TYPE [IF NOT EXISTS] MyTypeName
    [(colName colType, ...)]
    OPTIONS (
    'format'='{java|portable|compact}'
    [, 'javaClass'='com.myPackage.MyJavaClass'] <1>
    [, 'compactTypeName'='MyCompactRecordTypeName'] <2>
    [, 'portableFactoryId'='123', 'portableClassId'='456', ['portableVersion'='789']] <3>
    )
----
<1> `java` format requires the `javaClass` option.
<2> `portable` format requires `portableFactoryId` and `portableClassId` and optionally `portableVersion`.
<3> `compact` format requires `compactTypeName` - this is not the name of the created type, but rather internal name of the Compact record type, used internally by the Compact Serialization format.

> NOTE: The column list can be omitted in some cases. However, to reference another Type, it has to be explicitly specified in the column list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: To reference another type, you must provide the column list. Otherwise, the column may be automatically resolved as an `OBJECT` type.
```

> Otherwise, the column, if auto-resolved, will be resolved as *OBJECT*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

=== Java Format notes
For `java` format, if the column list is omitted, it will be automatically resolved from the corresponding
Java class. Note that the column list will only be extracted from the source class itself;

> if it has columns that are inherited from superclass, these columns will not be resolved.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if it has columns that are inherited from a superclass, these columns will not be resolved.
```

=== Portable Format notes

> When using the portable format, it is preferable for `(factoryId, classId, version)` tuple to be unique within the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using the `portable` format, make sure that the `factoryId`, `classId`, and `version` tuples are unique within the cluster.
```

Additionally, support for cycles also means no validation for existence of custom types at the time of `CREATE TYPE` execution.
**Type hierarchies are only verified for consistency upon actual use in `CREATE MAPPING`.**

=== Replacing Types and Type Consistency
Currently, there is a limitation on the replacement of existing types:
if the replaced type was already used in a mapping, you need to fully replace that mapping
to update its data type information using the `DROP MAPPING` and `CREATE MAPPING` statements.
However, if the type hierarchy was not used in a mapping, any type in that hierarchy can be safely
changed, and these changes will appear in the new mapping. This is because the links
between types are symbolic (based on the name only), and they're only "materialized" once used in a mapping.

=== CREATE TYPE Examples

NOTE: `EXTERNAL NAME` aliases are not supported for types, column names have to have exact
same name as their corresponding Java/Portable/Compact class fields.

Java Type with auto-resolution for columns:

[source,sql]
----
CREATE TYPE MyType OPTIONS (
    'format'='java',
    'javaClass'='com.example.MyJavaClass'
)
----

> Java Type with explicit columns:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Java type with explicit columns:
```

[source,sql]
----
CREATE TYPE MyType (
    id BIGINT,
    name VARCHAR,
    other MyOtherType
) OPTIONS (
    'format'='java',
    'javaClass'='com.example.MyJavaClass'
)
----

Portable Type:

[source,sql]
----
CREATE TYPE MyPortableType (
    id BIGINT,
    name VARCHAR
) OPTIONS (
    'format'='java',
    'portableFactoryId'='1',
    'portableClassId'='1'
    -- 'portableVersion'='0' - specified by default
)
----

Compact Type:

[source,sql]
----
CREATE TYPE MyCompactType (
   id BIGINT,
   name VARCHAR
) OPTIONS (
    'format'='java',
    'compactTypeName'='MyCompactTypeInternalCompactNameExample',
)
----

==== Creating Java Type Hierarchy with Cycles

Java classes for reference:

[source,java]
----
package com.example;

class A implements Serializable {
    public String name;
    public B b;
}
class B implements Serializable {
    public String name;
    public C c;
}
class C implements Serializable {
    public String name;
    public A a;
}
----

> Following commands will create an interlinked Type hierarchy:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following commands will create an interlinked type hierarchy:
```

NOTE: Order of execution of these commands doesn't matter.

===== Cyclic Type Hierarchy [[cyclicTypeDefinitions]]
[source,sql]
----
CREATE TYPE AType (
    name VARCHAR,
    b BType
) OPTIONS (
    'format'='java',
    'javaClass'='com.example.A'
);

CREATE TYPE BType (
    name VARCHAR,
    c CType
) OPTIONS (
    'format'='java',
    'javaClass'='com.example.B'
);

CREATE TYPE CType (
    name VARCHAR,
    a AType
) OPTIONS (
    'format'='java',
    'javaClass'='com.example.C'
);
----

== Creating Mappings with UDT Columns

> Syntax for `CREATE MAPPING` is virtually unchanged, except now, UDT Type Names can be used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The syntax of the `CREATE MAPPING` statement is virtually unchanged, except now, UDT names can be used
```

in the column type.

NOTE: UDT columns must be explicitly declared as of UDT type in the column list, even if the underlying
Java class of the column is registered as a backing Java class for an existing UDT.
Otherwise, the column in question will be auto-resolved as `OBJECT`.

=== Java Class Hierarchy for Reference:
The following classes will be used as a reference in the following sections to create types and mappings

[source,java]
----
package com.example;

class User implements Serializable {
    public Long id;
    public String name;
    public Organization organization;
}

class Organization implements Serializable {
    public Long id;
    public String name;
    public Office office;
}

class Office implements Serializable {
    public Long id;
    public String name;
}
----

=== Creating Types[[normalTypeDefinitions]]

NOTE: The `Type` suffix in the Type Names below is just for convenience. Types can have the same name
as their Java/Portable/Compact class, and are otherwise not limited naming-wise. The only limitation is that the

> types must have distinct names within the set of names of all `MAPPING` s and `VIEW` s as they

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
types must have distinct names within the set of names of all mappings and views as they
```

all share the same name space.

[source,sql]
----
CREATE TYPE OrganizationType (
    id BIGINT
    name VARCHAR,
    office OfficeType
) OPTIONS (
    'format'='java',
    'javaClass'='com.example.Organization'
);

CREATE TYPE OfficeType (
    id BIGINT
    name VARCHAR
) OPTIONS (
    'format'='java',
    'javaClass'='com.example.Office'
);
----

=== Creating Mappings

NOTE: The `organization` column is explicitly specified as `OrganizationType`. Without this definition, it would be
auto-resolved as generic `OBJECT`, and would not allow querying its sub-columns.

==== Normal Type Hierarchy [[normalMappings]]

[source,sql]
----
CREATE MAPPING users (
    __key BIGINT,
    id BIGINT,
    name VARCHAR,
    organization OrganizationType
) TYPE IMap OPTIONS (
    'keyFormat'='bigint',
    'valueFormat'='java',
    'valueJavaClass'='com.example.User'
);
----

==== Using Types from Cyclic Type Hierarchy [[cylicMappings]]

> Using Type Hierarchy from the <<cyclicTypeDefinitions, cyclic types example>>, all the following

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using type hierarchy from the <<cyclicTypeDefinitions, cyclic types example>>, all the following
```

mappings will work.

[source,sql]
----
CREATE MAPPING tableA (
    __key BIGINT,
    name VARCHAR,
    b BType
) OPTIONS (
    'keyFormat'='bigint',
    'valueFormat'='java',
    'valueJavaClass'='com.example.A'
);

CREATE MAPPING tableB (
    __key BIGINT,
    name VARCHAR,
    c CType
) OPTIONS (
    'keyFormat'='bigint',
    'valueFormat'='java',
    'valueJavaClass'='com.example.B'
);

CREATE MAPPING tableC (
    __key BIGINT,
    name VARCHAR,
    a AType
) OPTIONS (
    'keyFormat'='bigint',
    'valueFormat'='java',
    'valueJavaClass'='com.example.C'
);
----

== Querying Support

Querying is provided with the field access operator which has the following syntax:
[source,sql]
----
(<mappingColumn>).typeAColumn.typeBColumn.typeCColumn
----

> `mappingColumn` must be the top-level column inside a mapping that has a User-Defined Type as its Type,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`mappingColumn` must be the top-level column inside a mapping that has a UDT as its type,
```

whereas `typeACOlumn`,`typeBColumn` and `typeCColumn` are all columns within the UDTs.

> NOTE: `mappingColumn` Type must have these columns defined in `CREATE TYPE`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: The `mappingColumn` type must have the `typeACOlumn`,`typeBColumn` and `typeCColumn` columns defined in the `CREATE TYPE` command
```

// loop back to A2
a2.b.c.a.b.c.a = a2;

a2.name = "A2";
a2.b.name = "B2";
a2.b.c.name = "C2";
a2.b.c.a.name = "A3";
a2.b.c.a.b.name = "B3"
a2.b.c.a.b.c.name = "C3"
----

*Examples:*

Basic Query:

[source,sql]
----
SELECT
    (root).name AS v1,
    (root).b.name AS v2,
    (root).b.c.name AS v3,
    (root).b.c.a.name AS v4
FROM test
WHERE __key = 1
----

Result:
[cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|v1 VARCHAR|v2 VARCHAR|v3 VARCHAR|v4 VARCHAR

|'A1'
|'B1'
|'C1'
|'A1'

|===

Multiple Iteration Loop back through Cycle:

[source,sql]
----
SELECT
    (root).b.c.a.b.c.a.b.c.a.b AS v1,
FROM test
WHERE __key = 1
----

Result:
[cols="1"]
|===
|v1 VARCHAR

|'B1'

|===

Accessing additional cyclic chain:

[source,sql]
----
SELECT
    (root).b.c.a.name AS v1,
    (root).b.c.a.b.name AS v2,
    (root).b.c.a.b.c.name AS v3,
    (root).b.c.a.b.c.a.name AS v4
FROM test
WHERE __key = 2
----

Result:
[cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|v1 VARCHAR|v2 VARCHAR|v3 VARCHAR|v4 VARCHAR

|'A3'
|'B3'
|'C3'
|'A2'
|===

== `INSERT` and `UPDATE` Support

INSERT and UPDATE queries are supported in a limited way, specifically:

- `INSERT` and `UPDATE` queries are only supported for non-cyclic type hierarchies. Presence of a cycle

> in a Type Hierarchy automatically disables the ability to run these queries against any MAPPING that uses TYPEs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in a type hierarchy automatically disables the ability to run these queries against any MAPPING that uses UDTs
```

> from that TYPE hierarchy. However, it's still possible to use Acyclic branch of a Type Hierarchy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from that type hierarchy. However, it's still possible to use an acyclic branch of a type hierarchy
```

> even if that branch is used in a Cyclic Type Hierarchy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
even if that branch is used in a cyclic type hierarchy.
```

- `INSERT` queries require specifying the full list of columns even if the column of a nested type needs to be set to `NULL`.
- `UPDATE` queries only work on the root column and also require the full list of columns and sub-columns to work.
Updating sub-columns is technically possible by specifying column projections in place of sub-columns that shouldn't be changed.
- Both `UPDATE` and `INSERT` work through the usage of Row Value expression (which is similar to VALUES clause of INSERT).

=== Examples[[upsertExamples]]

Following examples use <<normalTypeDefinitions, normal type definitions>> and <<normalMappings, normal mappings>>.

> NOTE: Order of column values is identical to the order of columns specified when executing the underlying

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: The order of column values is identical to the order of columns specified when executing the underlying `CREATE MAPPING` and `CREATE TYPE` statements.
```

> `CREATE MAPPING` and `CREATE TYPE` statements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
